inevitably there will be there will be
individuals who wrongfully profit off of
the two trillion dollar bailout
as journalist Matt Taibbi writes the
headline-grabbing frauds will be found
in the Main Street side where crooks
will scheme to get their hands on 377
billion dollars in relief intended for
desperate restaurants
hardware stores nail salons and other
real world employers but in that piece
Matt argues that the lack of real
structural change tied to that
legislation has doomed us to repeat all
the mistakes of the 2008 crisis and set
us up for yet another financial
catastrophe and Matt joins us now via
Skype to elaborate and by the way Matt
now fully independent congratulations it
was a little bit of an update let folks
know what you're up to and where they
can find you yeah I'm still at rolling
stone to do print features and we're
still going to have the useful idiots
podcast which you've both have been on
with Katie Halper but my full-time job
is now going to be working for myself
sort of in the fashion of a guy have
stone doing a regular newsletter but
over the internet on a through a site
called sub stack which is exciting and
fun I'm trying to prove basically that
the independent model where is gonna
work better for journalists like me we
want where can they find you Matt how
can they all subscribe Taibbi sub stack
comm but you can just look for my
articles anywhere on on twitter at MTB
and you'll see how to get to the
articles and subscribe from there okay
promotion out of the way I mean we
haven't had you on actually since this
massive stimulus slash corporate bailout
bill passed so just give us sort of your
overall thoughts about it well I think
there's there's there are specific and
longer-term problems with this bailout
package the specific issue is that
there's basically no oversight and
they've there's obviously a mate in Main
Street portion of this bill which is
different from the last 2008-2009 rescue
where there are almost none of it went
to actual people but the execution of it
is going to be extremely complicated
they're doing it through the smaller the
Small Business Association which is
totally overwhelmed and not equal to the
task of you
during that many loans and so I you know
I talked to the former bailout inspector
who said you can expect tens of billions
of lost to fraud just on that side of
the bailout but the larger problem is on
the financial side where we've just sort
of accepted the idea that maintaining
prices in the financial markets as an
end to it end in itself and so we're
throwing trillions of dollars at this
with literally no oversight and this is
a repeat of 2008 and what people forget
is in the intervening period all this
new money that the last bailout injected
into the system has been devoured by
stock buybacks by all these companies so
we're it's essentially just bailing out
twelve years of you know profit hoarding
by all these companies that's why they
don't have any money not only they take
it all they borrowed more money to
commit more of it the stock buybacks and
that's why they essentially need a
bailout now right and Matt I mean this
really is could cause financial
contagion in the system and the fact we
haven't learned our lesson the second
time around is troubling let's lay out
the political and societal implications
for that you've covered this now for a
long time what were the societal impacts
of the 2008 bailout you know culminating
and Occupy Wall Street now they've done
in a second time around in modern memory
and recent people's lifetimes what is
that going to do to the political moment
well last time around again
so we last tomorrow is especially back
as we directly bailed out the people who
are criminally responsible for causing
the crash so you know we had all these
people who took dangerously
irresponsible bets and the mortgage
markets that the on products they knew
were going to explode and and that we
bailed them all that we just threw a
whole bunch of money at them we created
all these fed facilities that were
designed to off lift all the bad
investments that these companies made
into the onto the Fed and all that did
is incentivize these companies to engage
in in similarly risky behavior they just
did it in a different market the next
time this this time around it was in
commercial loans and corporate takeovers
it wasn't in mortgages so much and
that's what we're bailing out now so
it's it's going to be a sort of an
endless cycle of
of this kind of activity what do you
make of the way that Democrats
approached all of this because you
remember they made a big show of
basically killing this bill twice
because it had this massive corporate
slush fund with no oversight Chuck
Schumer tells us you know we got the old
we fought hard got this oversight this
Inspector General done of course
president Trump immediately upon signing
is like yeah that's nice then he fires
Inspector General so obviously and look
it was clear in the bill it was always
in his hands to be able to do that so it
was clear as day that the oversight was
always toothless from the beginning but
what do you make of you know Democrats
do you think they got rolld do you think
that they were actively sort of
complicit they were happy to have this
corporate slush fund with no oversight
is oversight even really the thing that
we need or should have we have been
fighting on the grounds of whether this
amount of money should go into a
corporate bail on in the first place
well if you remember the last bailout
there actually were significant numbers
of both Republicans and Democrats who
didn't vote for the the tarp and there
were significant opposition both times
they had to vote for the two big pieces
of the bailout package this time this
past 96 to nothing in the Senate and it
was done in a voice voice vote in the
house so the yes they they made a show
of opposing it but it was in the end
they just really rolled over for
everything and and all they did really
really was ask to tweak the ratios of
how much money would go where the and
there was really no sophisticated
opposition to any of the the bigger
portions of the bill which are all about
propping up the financial markets you
know they think they created essentially
a gigantic government-run hedge fund
that is going to permanently be pumping
liquidity into a whole range now of
financial markets they created a new one
yesterday for a high-yield corporate
dead I mean you know essentially the
government's gonna be buying junk bonds
now this isn't it's it's insanity you
know and I talked to people in the
business who are basically saying we
didn't even ask for this stuff and
they're giving it to us and it's it's I
think the Democrats again it's a repeat
of the last time where a lot of the
members of the Congress just don't
understand what it is that they're doing
so that's part of the
problem and Matt I mean we're seen as
reflected in the financial markets Matt
friend of the show Matt Stoller actually
tracks us very well is like immediately
after this happened he goes and he looks
at the listed funds of like private
equity mortgage debt and it's like all
of it starts to spike he sees that you
know like oh like the markets reacted
very favorably we saw CNBC you like
cheering on the Federal Reserve I think
it's it's very important to understand
the implications of what you're saying
which is that there are huge debt pools
and liquidity cash available to big
business to the financial markets while
people cannot pay their rent we know
that according to The Wall Street
Journal one-third of people were not
able to make their rent in April so that
is only gonna go up as sixteen point six
million unemployment claims have now
been filed in three weeks laid out for
people just that stark difference of who
is getting money and who is not well if
you want to apply for a loan and they
meet in the quote-unquote mainstream
portion of the bill you have to go
through a whole series of steps there's
all these obstacles you got it you got
to go through the SBA you got to go to
your local bank the bank has to go
through an extremely complicated
application process there's all these
different restrictions and conditions
that you that you this kind of means
testing that you have to go through to
get the money meanwhile on the financial
side you know even before the Charis Act
was passed the Fed was announcing oh
yeah we're gonna start buying seventy
five billion dollars of mortgage-backed
securities a day you know or fifty
billion dollars in Treasuries a day and
that was just an appetizer for the the
size of the other programs I mean they
have a whole series of Fed facilities
that are instantaneously going to go to
propping up all these bad investments
you know and and so you have Blackrock
which is the world's largest asset
manager now is in charge of
administering you know the very kinds of
products that they trade in on a day to
day basis so all these companies going
to be rescued and propped up you know
what a split second and forever as
opposed to the ordinary person who's
gonna have to wait in line for something
that is just going to be alone for most
people you know I think that's what yeah
so I think that's going to be the
difference and the thing that you're
pointing out here is this just isn't a
matter of fairness like oh it's unfair
that they're getting more than
this is a matter of fundamentally
shifting the structure of the economy in
a way that is very much a replay of 2008
where you know those who are already big
just got bigger bigger those who are
already rich just got richer and
everybody else got squeezed small
businesses continued to go under small
banks community banks continued to get
gobbled up by the big guys and we're
sort of laying out the groundwork for
another round of consolidation which
hands monopoly type powers to these
large corporations to occur once again
yeah and the the impact of the last
bailouts was we took a system that was
too big to fail that was hyper
concentrated we made it more
concentrated the the companies that did
fail we folded them into bigger
companies to make them more systemically
dangerous we we encouraged the companies
that made bad investments to continue
making bad investments because we use
the Fed basically as a garbage mechanism
to pull all these bad investments off
their books to make them whole again to
make them allow them to continue doing
bonuses I mean a lot of those companies
were doing stock buybacks right up until
the moment of the meltdown and in
September 2008 and continue doing them
right after they got the bailouts so
they never stopped essentially looting
their own companies and they were never
punished for it which totally
incentivized them to do it all over
again and that's exactly what happened
we saw record no multitrillion-dollar
a little in the last two or three years
we saw over a trillion dollars a year go
to stock buybacks so all that money is
disappearing for the economy and we're
just we're just gonna reel iqua date it
again allow them to do it again and this
cycle is gonna continue meanwhile as you
point out on the other end you see more
and more stress on ordinary people who
are having a harder and harder time
getting their money and that and it's so
it's it's it's an unfairness machine
it's it's it's an inequality machine
well Matt thank you so much for
reporting on this an essential voice in
these times again everybody please go
subscribe to Matt sub stack he's an
amazing journalist doing amazing work
thank you Matt thank you Matt thanks so
much crystal slugger take care huh next
on rising House Democrats plan to draft
another round of massive coronavirus
relief legislation with folk
some job creation Hill reporter Mike
Willis Seaver joins us now to discuss
when rising continues